Wagener, N., Stamer, M., Schöning, J., Tümler, J.: Investigating effects and user preferences of extra-and intradiegetic virtual reality questionnaires. In: 26th ACM Symposium on Virtual Reality Software and Technology. pp. 1–11 (2020)

VRST 2020

In the first study (N = 11), experts rated four design concepts of questionnaires embedded in VR, of which two were designed as extradiegetic and two as intradiegetic user interfaces. We show that intradiegetic UIs have a significantly higher perceived user experience and presence while the usability remains similar. Intradiegetic UIs are preferred by the majority. Based on these findings, we compared intradiegetic VR-questionnaires with paper-based evaluations in a follow up study (N = 24). 67% of the participants preferred the evaluation in VR, even though it takes significantly longer. We found no effect on presence.

Brade et al. [6] suggest that for testing in VR it is highly important for study participants to feel physically located in the virtual environment (VE), which means reaching a high presence [37, 44].

The assessment itself, most commonly done via questionnaires [3], is thus medially and visually separated from the actual test phase in VR. Relying on these kind of post-test assessments affects the emotional state, behaviour and performance of study participants in many ways. Transitioning from VR to reality can negatively affect the performance and moti vation of users [17] and can cause disorientation [15, 35]. Presence gets disrupted [39] and it takes time for participants to re-orient themselves in the new environment after a head-mounted-display (HMD) was removed and put on again [35].Additionally, the par ticipants need to constantly remind themselves of what they have experienced when filling out the questionnaire [15].

As asolution, embedding questionnaires directly in VR promises to mitigate the effects of classical post-test assessments [3, 30, 35]. In this paper, we refer to the integration of questionnaires in VR as INVR-Qs. First approaches already verify the validity of such evaluations [19, 30, 35], suggesting a reduction of the time needed for the whole study [35] and higher enjoyment [3].

for the whole study [35] and higher enjoyment [3]. Although Haas [19], Schwind et al. [35] and Putze et al [30] medially integrated the evaluation in VR, thus used INVR-Qs, they still visually separated the evaluation from the experienced VE. The ongoing experience got exchanged with another VE for eval uation purposes. We refer to this approach as using extradiegetic INVR-Qs [40]. However, Frommel et al. [15] stress the importance of staying close to the context of the ongoing experience when answering questionnaires. In this paper, we refer to this concept as utilising intradiegetic INVR-Qs [40]