Safikhani, S., Holly, M., Kainz, A., Pirker, J.: The influence of in-vr questionnaire design on the user experience. In: Proceedings of the 27th ACM Symposium on Virtual Reality Software and Technology. pp. 1–8 (2021)

VRST 21

The first results indicate that there is no significant difference in the case of usability and presence between different design layouts. Furthermore, we could not find a significant dif ference also for the task load except between 2D and web-based layout for mental demand and frustration as well as the duration of completing the questionnaire. The results also indicate that users generally prefer in-VR questionnaire designs to the traditional ones.

Hepperle et al. investigated the influence of 3D, 2D, and speech interactions in the case of usability and user preferences (10) [[(P) 2d, 3d or speech- a case study on which user interface is preferable for what kind of object inter action in immersive virtual reality]] . Their results indicated that 2D gives a good overview, but speech is faster and 3D is more fun.


> [!NOTE] why post test
> These questionnaires can be used as pre-, real-time, or post-assessment methods. In pre-surveys, the user is not im mersed in a virtual environment. This can lead to a less dominant difference between VR and the traditional desktop presentation of questionnaires. After immersion into the virtual environment, however, it is important to investigate the influence of the type of questionnaire presentation on user experience.


In recent years, the effect of in-VR questionnaires compared to out-VR ones on study results, such as the perception of immersion, has been investigated and demonstrated (1) [[(R) Examining Design Choices of Questionnaires in VR User Studies]] , (15) [[Questionnaires embedded in virtual environments- reliability and positioning of rating scales in virtual environments]] . As found by Putze et al. (14) [[(R) Breaking the experience - Effects of questionnaires in vr user studies]] in-VR questionnaire provides more reliable self-reports in comparison to the out-VR questionnaire.

The study by Krommel et al. (7) [[Integrated questionnaires- maintaining presence in game environments for self-reported data acquisition]] found that integrating questionnaires as a game element can lead to significantly higher participant presence. Furthermore, in-game questionnaires can increase the engagement of participants and motivate them to respond (22) [[Engagement in in-game questionnaires perspectives from users and experts]]  . These findings can have an even more dominant influence on the studies related to immersive VR experiences.

Studies on the influence of in-VR questionnaires on outcomes and user experience have recently received more attention. Schwind et al. [18] examined the effect of filling out questionnaires in VR in a study with 36 participants. These participants were asked to fill in the following questionnaires: SUS [23], Witmer & Singer (WS) [27], IPQ and NASA TLX[9] after they had completed two game levels in VR. The authors performed these levels using a realistic and simplified design approach, and the user was asked to answer the questionnaire both in-VR and out-VR. The results showed that the in-VR questionnaire can shorten the overall study time and increase the consistency of the variance without significantly changing the survey results.


> [!NOTE] Why not leave vr
>  Leaving a virtual environment for answering questionnaires related to the presence in that environment can lead to a break in the presence (BIP) and less accurate results [20]. Putze et al. [14] conducted a study to investigate the effect of in-VR questionnaires on the BIP.


> [!NOTE] Benefits of using world anchoring and more
> Alexandrovsky et al. [1] reviewed 15 cases of in VR questionnaires and conducted a study on the applicability and acceptance of the questionnaires among general users and experts. Theyconcludedthatthemajorityofparticipants wouldpreferin-VR questionnaires over out-VR questionnaires. Accordingly, they sug gest the use of the in-VR questionnaire for VR studies. Furthermore, they investigate the influence of the position of the questionnaire in a virtual environment on the user experience. The results show that users prefer pointing and anchoring in the world over other positioning options



> [!NOTE] Intra over extra
> They also found, however, that using in-VR questionnaires can increase physical and mental demands. Wagner et al. [24] compared different design approaches in the case of the in-VR questionnaire for product design evaluation in the automo tive industry. They concluded that the user prefers the intradiegetic approach to the extra one. The implementation of the intradiegetic can also lead to a higher presence with the same usability as the extradiegetic.


Recently, Feick et al. [6] presented an in-VR questionnaire toolkit that was implemented in the Unity game engine to lower the entry barrier of using questionnaires in virtual environments.


> [!NOTE] Why post test
> Inconsistencies in the environment or interactions can lead to disturbances in the mental model that cause BIP. Accordingly, the question will be raised, whether a visually separated UI can cause a systematic bias in the results. We studied this question by comparing two different design alternatives and compare them with the out-VR questionnaire experience.



> [!NOTE] How to maintain cont.
> Two factors accompanied the design language of this toolkit to ensure a consistent VR experience: visualization and interaction. The visual representation of the toolkit was adapted by the overall concept of the virtual scene. Furthermore, the interactions follow the same rules as the other interactive objects in the environment.


For this study, we designed and developed a VR application in which users played a game as an activity and then completed the questionnaires. We provided users, either locally or remotely, a zip f ile containing a PDF instruction and the main application. Users were required to first read the instructions and then follow the steps as given. The VR experience consists of the Onboarding-Room and three main game rooms with the same design but differing in the way the questionnaires are presented. Instructions in the Onboarding-Room familiarize users with the required interactions and objects in the main game room. This room is essential for users without VR experience, or also in the case of remote evaluations. Due to the Covid-19 pandemic, the protocol for the study was carried out in a manner design to reduce the risk for participants attending the university campus evaluation. In these cases, each participant woreaprotectivemaskthroughoutthewholeevaluation procedure. In addition, before and after using the VR setup, they used disinfection equipment for hands and VR controllers. We provided a disposable cover for the VR goggles to avoid direct skin contact with the device. Finally, only two persons (one participant and oneoperator) were permitted to stay in the big evaluation room at one time and with an open window to assure provision of a free airflow. At the start they filled in the demographic and preliminary ques tionnaires on the LimeSurvey website, with information items such as age, education, prior VR experience either with or without cyber sickness. They then started the application by entering the specified user ID and completing the Onboarding-Room. As the literature shows, presence and cybersickness are negatively related [25]. To reduce the probability of cybersickness through navigation in VR, we used teleportation as the main locomotion mechanism in addi tion to physical movement. The first interaction in the instruction of the Onboarding-Room covered this navigation system. Follow ing on from this the user learned how to manipulate the grabbing system and worked with the handles and the laser shooter to select objects. As an inherited feature of the VR environment, the first experience in an immersive environment is often distracting or confusing. In order to ensure that the user’s attention was directed only to the instructions in the Onboarding-Room, we designed a dark room where only the important areas or objects, e.g. the teleport area, grabbing handles, were illuminated. On finishing the Onboarding-Room, the user encountered the main game environ ment, which wedesignated as the Questionnaire-Rooms. According The Influence of in-VR Questionnaire Design on the User Experience VRST ’21, December 8–10, 2021, Osaka, Japan Structure.png Figure 2: the structure of the Questionnaire-Room (top view of 3D environment) Figure 3: the structure of 3D object for entering the user ID to their user ID, the order of the rooms is determined by the applica tion between all six permutations. The rooms are identified by the questionnaire layout in there, i.e. 3D, 2D, and web-based. Unlike the Onboarding-Room, these rooms are designed in a stylized theme with daylight. As shown in Fig. 2, the Questionnaire-Room consists of three main stages: user id stage, game stage, and questionnaire stage, which latter is placed at different locations depending on the questionnaire layout. When accessing this environment, the user should enter a specified user ID again. This value will later be used as a unique indicator for the survey records of this user. Wehave thus implemented an interactable 3D object as a device for entering the user ID (see Fig. 3). After confirming the user ID, the user goes on to play a game as an activity, and this is done by Figure 4: The in-VR questionnaire 3D layout throwing balls to hit targets. The targets move in the predefined path with different sizes and speeds. There were also some blocking objects that move between the targets to increase the difficulty of the game. The user had a limited number of balls to throw, and the time limit was set at 150 seconds. We used three monitors above the target area to display the user score, remaining time, and text feedback according to the user’s performance. The game ends when the user hits all ducks or reaches the time limit. When the users finished the game, they were taken to the ques tionnaire stage in the case of in-VR layouts. Fig. 4 shows the struc ture of the 3D layout questionnaire object in the scene. This inter active questionnaire object consists of three main parts: 1. question text and questionnaire progress monitor 2. the handle of answer selection and range indicator 3. accept and return handle. Input data from predefined questionnaires, such as LimeSurvey’s XML data input, is parsed into a structure that can be displayed by the device. The order of questions and questionnaire forms can beeasily defined either in the source or in the game engine. The parsing pro cedure structures the input data into the main text and the desired answer range. The user can select the answer with the blue handle and confirm it with the green handle. The value of the answer is always displayed between acceptable ranges in front of the user. In VRST ’21, December 8–10, 2021, Osaka, Japan Safikhani, Holly, Kainz, Pirker Figure 5: The in-VR questionnaire 2D layout case of errors in answering data or the decision to change it, the user can drag the return handle to change the previous question. The 2D layout questionnaire also follows the same structure as the 3Dquestionnaire (see Fig. 5), but with similar pointer interaction as in conventional VR applications. The user can select an answer by aiming at the value on the wall using the laser pointer and pressing the "Accept" button. The same return function is also available here. Wehave embedded in-VR questionnaire layouts into the environ ment with animations for opening and closing to ensure improved consistency. Moreover, in the case of the web-based questionnaire, the user is directed to the LimeSurvey website to complete the questionnaire. When each room has been successfully dealt with, a specific environment appears, prompting the user to remove the headset and return to the desktop to enter the next level. It thus offers us the possibility of a fresh start before each room. In the end, the application asked users to complete the post questionnaire on the LimeSurvey website. The entire procedure took between 30 to 40 minutes for each participant.